Protocols: A protocol is a set of rules that allows two devices to communicate

Common protocols in networking:

1) TCP/IP - Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol -             COMMUNICATE OVER LANs AND WANs
2) HTTP - Hypertext Transfer Protocol -                                   WEBPAGE REQUEST
3) HTTPS - Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure -                           WEBPAGE REQUEST
4) FTP - File Transfer Protocol -                                         FILE TRANSFER
5) POP - Post Office Protocol -                                           EMAIL
6) IMAP - Internet Message Access Protocol -                              EMAIL
7) SMTP - Simple Mail Transfer Protocol -                                 EMAIL

TCP/IP
TCP - provides an error free transmission between two routers
IP - Routes packets across A Wide area network
TCP/IP - together make up a stack which is the foundation of communication over the internet.


HTTP / HTTPS

HTTP - is a way for a client and server to send and recieve requests and to deliver HTML Web pages
It is the fundamental protocol of the world wide web (WWW)
HTTPS - is effectively the same as the HTTP except it adds in ecryption and authentication
so it should be used on the web when a website needs to deal with sensitive information such as passwords or bank account details.


FTP
is used for sending files between computers, normally on a wide area network.
These are software applications which sit on the actual FTP Protocol.
 
POP/ IMAP / SMTP
All three ae used in conjunction with mail servers to deal with emails.
Mail servers act like a virtual online post office for all incoming and outgoing email

SMTP - Transfers outgoing emails from one server to another / from a client to a server
POP - Retrives emails from a mail server. Remove it from server and transfer to your device
IMAP - Keeps emails on the mail server, allowing synchronicity between devices



The Internet
Most well known Wide Area network.
A collection of interconnected networks spanning the world
we see a home network connected via wireless router.
The home router is connected to an Internet Service Provider typically by telephone connection or fibre
Our ISP is connected to DNS (Domain Name server) and other routers on the backbone of the internet.








Tasks:

When connecting computers into a network, the use of appropriate protocols are important.
(a) Explain what is meant by a protocol.
[2]
(b) For each of the scenarios below, identify the most appropriate protocol to be used and explain 
the function of the protocol.
) A user wants to transfer a file directly from his computer to his friend’s computer.
 (ii) A customer wants to securely log into her bank’s website to check her account balance.
(c) Explain the difference between how the IMAP (Internet message access protocol) and SMTP 
(simple mail transfer protocol) protocols are used.




